<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Suma Genji</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="suma-genji" epub:type="z3998:drama">
			<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="ja-Latn">Suma Genji</h2>
			<section id="suma-genji-dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Characters</h3>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Shite</i>, an old woodcutter, who is an apparition of the hero, Genji, as a sort of place-spirit, the spirit of the seashore at Suma.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Waki</i>, Fujiwara, a priest with a hobby for folklore, who is visiting sacred places.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Second <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Shite</i>, or the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Shite</i> in his second manner or apparition, Genji’s spirit appearing in a sort of glory of waves and moonlight.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</section>
			<section id="suma-genji-scene-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="se:label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Announcing himself.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>I, Fujiwara no Okinori,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Am come over the sea from Hiuga;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I am a priest from the shinto temple at Miyazaki,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And, as I lived far afield,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I could not see the temple of the great god at Ise;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And now I am a-mind to go thither,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And am come to Suma, the seaboard.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Here Genji lived, and here I shall see the young cherry,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The tree that is so set in the tales⁠—</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shite</td>
							<td>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>And I am a woodcutter of Suma.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I fish in the twilight;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By day I pack wood and make salt.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Here is the mount of Suma.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There is the tree, the young cherry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<p>And you may be quite right about Genji’s having lived here. That blossom will flare in a moment.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</td>
							<td>I must find out what that old man knows. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Shite</b>.</i> Sir, you seem very poor, and yet you neglect your road; you stop on your way home, just to look at a flower. Is that the tree of the stories?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shite</td>
							<td>I dare say I’m poor enough; but you don’t know much if you’re asking about that tree, “Is it the fine tree of Suma?”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</td>
							<td>Well, <em>is</em> it the tree? I’ve come on purpose to see it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shite</td>
							<td>What! you really have come to see the cherry-blossom, and not to look at Mount Suma?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</td>
							<td>Yes; this is where Genji lived, and you are so old that you ought to know a lot of stories about him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Telling out <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Genji’s</b> thoughts.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>If I tell over the days that are gone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>My sleeves will wither.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
										<br/>
										<span>The past was at Kiritsubo;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I went to the lovely cottage, my mother’s,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But the emperor loved me.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<p>I was made esquire at twelve, with the hat. The soothsayers unrolled my glories.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> I was called Hikaru Genji. I was <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">chujo</i> in Hahakigi province. I was <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">chujo</i> in the land of the maple-feasting.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> At twenty-five I came to Suma, knowing all sorrow of seafare, having none to attend my dreams, no one to hear the old stories.</p>
								<p>Then I was recalled to the city. I passed from office to office. I was <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">naidaijin</i> in Miwotsukushi, I was <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">dajodaijin</i> in the lands of Otome, and <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">daijotenno</i> in Fuji no Uraba; for this I was called Hikam Kimi.</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</td>
							<td>But tell me exactly where he lived. Tell me all that you know about him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shite</td>
							<td>One can’t place the exact spot; he lived all along here by the waves. If you will wait for the moonlight you might see it all in a mist.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>He was in Suma in the old days⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shite</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stepping behind a screen or making some sign of departure, he completes the sentence of the chorus.</i>⁠—but now in the aery heaven.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</b>.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Wait and the moon will show him.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That woodman is gone in the clouds.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Waki</td>
							<td>That “woodman” was Genji himself, who was here talking live words. I will wait for the night. I will stay here to see what happens. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Announcing his act.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></i> Then Fujiwara no Okinori lay down and heard the waves filled with music.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="suma-genji-scene-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="se:label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> begins with the appearance of the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Second <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Shite</i></b>, that is to say, a bright apparition of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Genji</b> in supernatural form.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genji</td>
							<td>
								<p>How beautiful this sea is! When I trod the grass here I was called “Genji the gleaming,” and now from the vaulting heaven I reach down to set a magic on mortals. I sing of the moon in this shadow, here on this sea-marge of Suma. Here I will dance Sei-kai-ha, the blue dance of the sea waves.</p>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">And then he begins to dance.</i>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Accompanying and describing the dance.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>The flower of waves-reflected</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Is on his white garment;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That pattern covers the sleeve.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The air is alive with flute-sounds,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With the song of various pipes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The land is a-quiver,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And even the wild sea of Suma</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Is filled with resonant quiet.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Moving in clouds and in rain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The dream overlaps with the real;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There was a light out of heaven,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>There was a young man at the dance here;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Surely it was Genji Hikaru,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>It was Genji Hikaru in spirit.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genji</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My name is known to the world;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here by the white waves was my dwelling;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I am come down out of sky</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To put my glamour on mortals.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gracious is the presence of Genji,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is like the feel of things at Suma.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genji</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Referring also to a change in the dance.</i>
								</p>
								<p>The wind is abated.</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>A thin cloud⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genji</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>—clings to the clear-blown sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It seems like the springtime.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He came down like Brahma, Indra, and the Four Kings visiting the abode of Devas and Men.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, the soul of the place.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, who seemed but a woodman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He flashed with the honoured colours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He the true-gleaming.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blue-grey is the garb they wear here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blue-grey he fluttered in Suma;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His sleeves were like the grey sea-waves;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They moved with curious rustling,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like the noise of the restless waves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like the bell of a country town</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Neath the nightfall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
