<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Takasago</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="takasago" epub:type="z3998:drama">
			<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="ja-Latn">Takasago</h2>
			<section id="takasago-introduction" epub:type="introduction z3998:non-fiction">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Introduction</h3>
				<p>The scene of the Prologue is the shore near Aso; of the first Act the scene is the strand of Takasago, of the second Act the scene is the strand of Sumiyoshi. (On the stage there is no differentiation of scene.)</p>
				<p>The chorus would, originally at least, consist of the actors. At a later period more or fewer of the musicians and songmen (<i xml:lang="ja-Latn">utahigata</i>) took choral parts. It does not seem that there was any special chorus. It has, however, been supposed that the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">waki</i> was accompanied by two <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">hafuri</i> (shrine-servants), who acted as chorus.</p>
				<p>The performance began with the entry, from behind, of the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">shite</i> and his <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">tsure</i> and the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">waki</i>, who⁠—in later times perhaps some of the musicians⁠—would chant the opening quatrain. Upon the stage a Pine-tree was originally placed, afterwards represented by a picture on a curtain of the Tree under which the Spirits of the Trees of Takasago and Sumiyoshi were depicted, holding rakes in their hands and sweeping up the fallen needles.</p>
				<p>The dancing or posturing would be part of the duty of the actors, not of the chorus, the functions of which only distantly resemble those of the chorus in the Greek Drama.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="takasago-dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Characters</h3>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">shite</i>, or protagonist, an Ancient, being the Manifestation or Presence of the Spirit of the Pine-tree of Sumiyoshi (or Suminoye) in Settsu.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">tsure</i>, or companion of the Ancient, being a Dame, the Manifestation or Presence of the Spirit of the Pine-tree of Takasago in Harima.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">ato shite</i>, or deuteragonist⁠—the part being taken by the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">shite</i>⁠—the Manifestation or Presence of the God (representing the three gods) of Sumiyoshi.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">waki</i>, or side-actor (tritagonist), being Tomonari, the Warden of the Shinto shrine of Aso in Higo (southwest of Kyūshū).</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</section>
			<section id="takasago-prologue" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Prologue</h3>
				<p><b>Scene.</b> The Seashore Near Aso in Higo.</p>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</b>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">In traveller’s trim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>now first he fareth forth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and far the way is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>and many the days before him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>I who speak, Sirs, am Warden of the shrine of Aso in the land of Higo within the isle of the Nine Territories,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and Tomonari is my name. Never yet have I beheld City-Royal, and so am I minded to go up to the Capital; and for that so good an occasion may not be mine again, I would fain turn aside a space by the way and gaze upon the strand of Takasago in the land of Harima.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Describing the journey.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span class="i1">In trim of traveller</span>
										<br/>
										<span>this day to start he mindeth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">for City-Royal,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>for distant City-Royal⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">across the surf he</span>
										<br/>
										<span>upon the shipway oareth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">gentle the skies are,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>the spring-winds softly blowing⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">what tale of days shall</span>
										<br/>
										<span>his bark in the cloudy distance</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">sail o’er the sea-plain</span>
										<br/>
										<span>till Harima he reacheth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">and Takasago</span>
										<br/>
										<span>at last his keel receiveth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">his keel receiveth!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="takasago-act-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="se:label">Act</span>
					<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b>Scene.</b> The Strand of Takasago<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> overshadowed by an ancient gnarled and wide-branched Pine-tree.</p>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Ancient of Suminoye</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Dame of Takasago</b>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b> together</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">In the Pine-tree</span>
									<br/>
									<span>of Takasago murmureth</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the gentle spring-wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>across the darkening air</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the deep tones wafting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>of the bell of old Onöe⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Mid the rocks mist-hidden</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the roar of the surf resoundeth;</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">or ebb or flood be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the cadenced music telleth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Whom may I friend hail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>if mine own ancient comrade</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I may not call thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Tree of Takasago!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">with whom sweet converse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>to hold of long past years</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">beneath the snows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>of many a winter white hid⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">for wont I have been</span>
									<br/>
									<span>or night or morn, or sleeping</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">on my rude pallet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>like hoary crane’s nest whiten’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">with morning moonshine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>or springtime’s rimy sparkle</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">like moonshine gleaming,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>or waking with the daybreak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">in the murmurous music</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the winds make in thy leafery</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">to find new gladness⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>so communing with my own heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">my night thoughts give me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>in utterance give me solace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">What ask the winds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>what ask they of the Pine-tree?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the falling leaves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>blown by the shore winds down</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">upon our garments<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span>they give the answer, give they,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the leaves low-fallen</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">we sweep and heap</span>
									<br/>
									<span>beneath the Pine-tree’s shadow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">’tis Takasago</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’tis the Tree of yore Onöe’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">doth bide forever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the waves of Time affronting⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">so gather we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the leaves low fallen gather,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">while ever the Pine-tree</span>
									<br/>
									<span>shall ever live its life days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and Takasago</span>
									<br/>
									<span>its fame preserve forever,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">its fame forever!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>Ah, I looked to meet some village-folk here, and now come forth an Ancient and his Dame. Good people, I would ask a thing of you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>Is it to me you speak, Sir, what would you know?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>Tell me, which among these trees I see is the Pine of Takasago?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>The Tree it is, Sir, under whose shadow we sweep and heap the fallen leaves.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>The Pine of Takasago and the Pine of Suminoye, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">aioi no matsu</i>, the Wedded Pines, the poets name them, the Pines that grow old together; yet wide apart lie the strands of Suminoye and Takasago, how, then, may these Trees be called the Wedded Pines!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>’Tis so, Sir, as you are pleased to say. In the foreword of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Songs, Old and New</i> is it not written that the story of the Trees of Takasago and Suminoye witnesseth of spousal love? I, this Ancient, am of Sumiyoshi in the land of Tsu, this Dame is native-born, read you us the riddle, if you may, Sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>A miracle ’tis, good sooth! a wedded pair I behold you dwelling here together, yet hill and sea and moorland wide lie between Suminoye and Takasago; I cannot read the riddle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</td>
							<td>Not well considered, Sir, would I say your words are, for though thousands of leagues of land and water part them, yet between wedded folk whose thoughts and feelings ay commingle never long is affection’s path.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>Yet again bethink you, Sir⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td>Things unquick are the Trees of Takasago and Sumiyoshi, yet men well call them the Wedded Pines. But we who speak have sense and feeling, to this year for many a year hath the Ancient of Sumiyoshi and the Dame of Takasago known spousal union, years many as the Tree hath endured time have they been a Wedded Pair, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">aioi no fûfu</i>, who grow old together!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>Ah! fair are your words and pleasant; but tell me, tell me, bides there not in these parts some memory of the ancient story of the Wedded Pines which grow old together!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>The sages of old time have told us that the Wedded Trees were sign and presage of a happy age.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</td>
							<td>The story of Takasago is as old as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Garner of Ancient Verse</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> that goeth back to the elder time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>And Sumiyoshi<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> betokeneth the joy of living in this happy Yengi<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> age.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</td>
							<td>The Pine-tree telleth us of the countless leaves of speech⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>Now, as of yore, the tree flourisheth, ever green⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td>And ever doth its unceasing greenery adorn the age⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>Now do I understand and thank you well, good folk; of doubt my mind is clear as a cloudless sky in Spring.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>How soft yon light that falleth on the western sea!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>There lieth Suminoye⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>On Takasago’s shore we stand.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>The Pines their greenery blend⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>O time of Spring!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>How balmy ’tis!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">In waveless peace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the four seas lap our shores,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the gentle tide winds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>no murmur mid the woods wake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Oh, fair the age is!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>fair yonder Pine-trees’ spousal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">
										<i xml:lang="ja-Latn">äiöino</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">äiöinomatsu</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">whose happy augury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>men note with awe and wonder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">while vainly seek they</span>
									<br/>
									<span>meet words their thanks to utter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">in such an age</span>
									<br/>
									<span>that they do live rejoicing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>in their Lord’s abundant bounty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td>Ah tell me, tell me all the happy story of the Pine of Takasago!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>Well! no souls have trees and herbs, men say, yet never miss they their appointed times of flower and fruit, they love the warm light of Spring, and first those flowers blow whose buds look to the midday⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>Yea! and this Pine-tree ever flourisheth, showing bloom and leaf, all heedless of change of season.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>Aye! through Spring and Summer and Autumn and Winter, under deepest snow, and for a thousand years it bideth green, yea for ten flower-cycles of a thousand years its hue endureth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>Such virtue hath the Pine-tree.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>The pearly dewdrops that hang on its leaves⁠—leaves of speech belike⁠—do cleanse the heart of man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td>All living things that live⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<p>Under the protecting shadow of our wide-isled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> land do they not flourish?</p>
								<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A member of the chorus here recites the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">kuse</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> or precept of the piece.</i> Aye! and as Chônô<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> hath it, all things, or quick or unquick, are revealed in song; herbs and trees and soil and sand, the whispers of the wind, the babble of the brooks⁠—all contain the soul of poetry. The sway of the woods in Spring under the eastern breezes, the chirrup of the cicada among the dews that moisten the unsunn’d foliages in Autumn, are they not forms or models of our native verse? In the universe of things that grow, doth not the Pine-tree surpass all the world of trees; bright as a full bevy of court nobles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> the green leafery defieth a thousand autumns unshowing any change of hue⁠—well worthy, belike, the Pine-tree is of the badge of rank bestowed upon it by China’s Sovran Shikwo!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> In barbarian lands, within our own borders, by all the peoples of earth, is not the Pine-tree held blessed?</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Hark! I hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the solemn tone of Onöe’s bell</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">by Takasago.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Though with the daydawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the hoarfrost shineth chilly</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the Pine-tree ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>unchang’d its leafery showeth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>in the deep green shadow</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">or morn or evening</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the fallen leaves we sweep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">yet ever fall they,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>for true it is that never</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">yon leafery perisheth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>and ages long endureth</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the Pine-tree’s greenery</span>
									<br/>
									<span>as wild moor-creeper endless,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">among the trees</span>
									<br/>
									<span>that keep their freshness ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">deathless the fame is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>of the Pine of Takasago</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">for ay a symbol,</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">äiöinomatsu</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>and sign of wedded joyance.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></td>
							<td>Well have ye told the ancient story of the Pine-trees whose everlasting bloom hath earned such fame, but, Sir and Dame, tell me how ye be called.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td>Why should we not tell them, we are the spirits of the Pine-trees of Takasago and Suminoye that grow old together. As a wedded pair do we present ourselves.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>Now are manifest the wedded spirits. O wonder! such then is the mystery of the Pine-trees that o’ershadow these famous strands.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td>Though plants and trees be things unquick⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>In this auspicious age⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ancient</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dame</b></td>
							<td>Or trees or herbs⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">In this our land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>our mighty Sovran ruleth</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">beneath his sway</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’tis good to live<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> forever,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and Sumiyoshi</span>
									<br/>
									<span>where fair it is to dwell</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">our wanderer fain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>would seek, and humbly there</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the god await⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>wherefore ’tis now he climbeth</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">on fisher’s bark</span>
									<br/>
									<span>anigh the sea-marge floateth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and forth he fareth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>by favouring breezes wafted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">across the waters</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the evening waters fareth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tomonari</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">From Takasago</span>
									<br/>
									<span>on fisher’s bark I climb</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and sail away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>far o’er the waves of ocean</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">as the pale moon riseth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>under Awaji’s shadow</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I cleave the waters</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’yond roaring Naruwo faring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">till Sumiyoshi</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I reach, fair Sumiyoshi!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="takasago-act-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="se:label">Act</span>
					<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b>Scene.</b> The Strand of Sumiyoshi in Settsu.</p>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The God of Sumiyoshi</b>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Entering.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span class="i1">Long ’tis since saw I</span>
										<br/>
										<span>the Princess Pine that groweth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">by Sumiyoshi</span>
										<br/>
										<span>nor knoweth, belike, the Sovran</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">how many an age through</span>
										<br/>
										<span>my grace on him hath rested;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">and now for generations</span>
										<br/>
										<span>as palace-fence enduring,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">to cheer my heart</span>
										<br/>
										<span>be the sacred mime enacted,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">wherefore the night drums</span>
										<br/>
										<span>bring, and beat out their music,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">ye servants of the shrine.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">From the western sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>from where the waves are breaking</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">upon Aoki⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>cometh the holy Presence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">in this fair spring-tide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>when the Tree Divine full flourisheth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and still the snows lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>lightly on As’kagata⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">where men do gather</span>
									<br/>
									<span>on the strand rich seaweed harvest⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>at foot of the ancient Pine-tree</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I will recline me⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>with a thousand years’ green leafery</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">his<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> hands full filled be⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>and spray of plum-tree gathered</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">my head adorning⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>like latest snows of winter</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">the blossoms deck him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>To the god of Sumiyoshi, since clear the moon shineth, let us offer thanks and praise, and for many an age adore his Presence that deigneth to take pleasure in this fair abode.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">The virgin voices,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>how clear is their music</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">beneath the Pine-tree</span>
									<br/>
									<span>of bright-shored Suminoye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">as featly dance they</span>
									<br/>
									<span>to the air of the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">Blue Sea Wave</span>”</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">by the blue sea where</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the shadow is reflected</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">of the Princess Pine-tree.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The way of god and Sovran</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">towards City-Royal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>will now be straightway wended<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">this fair spring season⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis the Dance of “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="fr">Joyeuse Rentrée</span>”</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">for years ten thousand</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God of Sumiyoshi</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">in ritual vestments</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">let arms extended</span>
									<br/>
									<span>all ill fend from the land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and arms fair-folded</span>
									<br/>
									<span>embrace all happiness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">and make the folk glad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>with the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">Joy of a Thousand Autumns</span>,”</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">long life give all men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>with the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">Joy of a Myriad Years</span>”⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">
										<i xml:lang="ja-Latn">äiöinomatsu</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>among the Wedded Pine-trees</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">growing old together</span>
									<br/>
									<span>may gentle winds forever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>wake music ever haunting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>and ever the world enchanting!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
